>> Woodruff: TIME IS RUNNING OUT
FOR AN IRAN NUCLEAR DEAL.
ANOTHER DEADLINE PASSES WITH A
FINAL AGREEMENT STILL OUT OF
REACH.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY:
A DIFFERENT WAY OF LOOKING AT
THE CRISIS IN GREECE.
HOW ECONOMIC UNCERTAINTY LEADS
TO EMOTIONAL DESPAIR
>> IF GREECE AND ITS PARTNERS
WON'T FIND A SOLUTION, THE OTHER
BETTER AND WE HAVE MORE THAT IS
PROBABLY GOING TO BRING MORE
SUICIDES THAN WE ALREADY HAVE.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, A TEAM OF
RESEARCHERS HARDWIRE UNDERGROUND
VOLCANOES TO DISCOVER THE
MYSTERIES OF ERUPTIONS AND OCEAN
LIFE.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE GOVERNMENT OF
AFGHANISTAN CONFIRMED TODAY IT
HAS OPENED DIRECT TALKS WITH THE
TALIBAN.
IT'S THEIR FIRST, FORMAL FACE-
TO-FACE ENCOUNTER SINCE A U.S.
COALITION OUSTED THE TALIBAN
FROM POWER IN 2001.
AFGHAN PRESIDENT ASHRAF GHANI
SAID THE GOAL IS TO "CHANGE THIS
'MEETING' INTO A PROCESS OF
CONTINUING TALKS."
OFFICIALS SAID THE TALKS ARE
TAKING PLACE IN PAKISTAN'S
CAPITAL CITY, ISLAMABAD.
>> Ifill: U.S. STRATEGY TO
DEFEAT THE ISLAMIC STATE CAME IN
FOR HEAVY CRITICISM TODAY FROM
SENATE REPUBLICANS.
JOHN McCAIN, CHAIRING THE ARMED
SERVICES COMMITTEE, CHALLENGED
THE PRESIDENT'S POLICIES ON ISIS
AT A HEARING.
>> THERE IS NO COMPELLING REASON
TO BELIEVE THAT ANYTHING WE ARE
DOING CURRENTLY WILL BE
SUFFICIENT TO ACHIEVE THE
PRESIDENT'S LONG-STATED GOAL OF
DEGRADING OR ULTIMATELY
DESTROYING ISIL, EITHER IN THE
SHORT TERM OR THE LONG TERM.
OUR MEANS AND OUR CURRENT LEVEL
OF EFFORT ARE NOT ALIGNED WITH
OUR ENDS.
THAT SUGGESTS WE ARE NOT
WINNING, AND WHEN YOU'RE NOT
WINNING IN WAR, YOU ARE LOSING.
>> Ifill: DEFENSE SECRETARY
ASHTON CARTER CONCEDED ONLY 60
SYRIANS HAVE BEEN TRAINED TO
FIGHT ISLAMIC STATE FORCES SO
FAR.
>> THIS NUMBER IS MUCH SMALLER
THAN WE'D HOPED FOR AT THIS
POINT, PARTLY BECAUSE OF THE
VETTING STANDARDS.
WE MAKE SURE THAT THEY, FOR
EXAMPLE, AREN'T GOING TO POSE A
GREEN-ON-BLUE THREAT TO THEIR
TRAINERS; THAT THEY DON'T HAVE
ANY HISTORY OF ATROCITIES.
THESE ARE ALL THINGS THAT ARE
REQUIRED OF US, AND THAT THEY'RE
GOING-- THEY'RE WILLING TO
ENGAGE IN THE CAMPAIGN IN A WAY
THAT'S COMPLIANT WITH THE LAW OF
ARMED CONFLICT.
>> Ifill: MEANWHILE, INSIDE
SYRIA, KURDISH FIGHTERS, BACKED
BY U.S. AIR STRIKES, RECAPTURED
10 VILLAGES FROM ISLAMIC STATE
CONTROL.
THE KURDS HAVE BEEN ADVANCING
TOWARD THE MILITANTS' DE FACTO
CAPITAL.
>> Woodruff: IN YEMEN, FIGHTING
HAS FLARED AGAIN, AND WITH IT,
THE NUMBER OF DEATHS.
LOCAL RESIDENTS AND SHIITE
REBELS SAY NEARLY 200 PEOPLE
WERE KILLED YESTERDAY.
MANY DIED IN AIR STRIKES BY
SAUDI ARABIA AND ITS ALLIES.
TODAY, AIR ASSAULTS BADLY
DAMAGED THE REBELS' POLITICAL
OFFICES.
THE GROUP HAS IRAN'S SUPPORT,
WHILE THE SAUDIS BACK YEMEN'S
GOVERNMENT IN EXILE.
>> Ifill: VIOLENCE ALSO SURGED
AGAIN IN NIGERIA, WHERE A BOMB
BLAST KILLED AT LEAST 25 PEOPLE.
IT TARGETED CIVIL SERVANTS AT A
GOVERNMENT BUILDING ON THE
OUTSKIRTS OF ZARIA, IN THE
NORTHERN PART OF THE COUNTRY.
ATTACKS BY THE ISLAMIST MILITANT
GROUP BOKO HARAM HAVE KILLED
SEVERAL HUNDRED PEOPLE IN RECENT
DAYS.
>> Woodruff: THIS WAS A DAY OF
REMEMBRANCE IN BRITAIN, MARKING
TEN YEARS SINCE THE TERRORIST
ATTACKS IN LONDON ON JULY 7,
2005.
52 PEOPLE DIED WHEN FOUR SUICIDE
BOMBERS ATTACKED LONDON'S
TRANSPORT SYSTEM.
VICTIMS' RELATIVES, POLITICIANS
AND ROYALTY MARKED THE DAY AT A
SERVICE IN SAINT PAUL'S
CATHEDRAL IN LONDON.
FLOWER PETALS DRIFTED DOWN
DURING A NATIONWIDE MINUTE OF
SILENCE.
A SEPARATE SERVICE BROUGHT
RELATIVES AND SURVIVORS TO HYDE
PARK.
EMMA CRAIG WAS 14 YEARS OLD AT
THE TIME OF THE ATTACKS.
>> QUITE OFTEN PEOPLE SAY, "IT
DIDN'T BREAK US.
TERRORISM WON'T BREAK US."
THE FACT IS, IT MAY NOT HAVE
BROKEN LONDON, BUT IT DID BREAK
SOME OF US.
SOMETIMES I FEEL THAT PEOPLE ARE
SO HELLBENT ON TRYING TO MAKE A
POINT ABOUT TERRORISM NOT
BREAKING US THAT THEY FORGET
ABOUT ALL THE PEOPLE THAT GOT
CAUGHT UP IN IT.
NOT FOR MY SAKE, BUT FOR THOSE
THAT WERE KILLED ON THAT DAY AND
THEIR FAMILIES, THEY ARE THE
PEOPLE THAT WE ARE HERE TODAY TO
REMEMBER.
MAY WE NEVER FORGET.
>> Woodruff: BRITAIN IS
CURRENTLY ON ITS SECOND HIGHEST
ALERT LEVEL, "SEVERE."
THAT'S MAINLY BECAUSE OF THE
THREAT POSED BY BRITONS WHO'VE
BECOME ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS.
>> Ifill: EUROZONE LEADERS TODAY
CALLED A FINAL SUMMIT ON THE
GREEK CRISIS, FOR SUNDAY.
THAT CAME AFTER THEY CAME AWAY
EMPTY-HANDED FROM A MEETING WITH
PRIME MINISTER ALEXIS TSIPRAS.
INSTEAD, THE PARTIES SPIRALED
CLOSER TO A SO-CALLED "GREXIT"--
A GREEK EXIT FROM THE EUROZONE.
JONATHAN RUGMAN OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS REPORTS FROM
BRUSSELS.
>> Reporter: ALEXIS TSIPRAS,
SUPPOSEDLY UNDER PRESSURE TO
PRESENT A NEW REFORM PLAN FOR
SERIOUS TALKS TO BEGIN.
BUT THIS RELAXED LOOKING GREEK
BEARING NO SUCH WRITTEN GIFT
TODAY.
HIS UNSPOKEN MESSAGE, PERHAPS,
THAT HE WON'T SIGN A BAD DEAL
JUST BECAUSE THE GERMANS WANT
HIM TO.
AND THE ROW OVER GREECE'S FUTURE
NOW PERILOUSLY CLOSE TO DIVIDING
ITS EUROPEAN CREDITORS.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE OF FRANCE
FEARFUL OF GREECE'S EXIT AND
DESPERATE FOR COMPROMISE.
DESPERATE FOR COMPROMISE. >> (
translated): WE WANT
>> (translated): WE
WANT GREECE TO STAY IN THE
EUROZONE.
GREECE TO STAY IN THE EUROZONE.
THAT IS OUR AIM.
BUT TO ACHIEVE THIS WE EXPECT
GREECE TO MAKE SOME SUBSTANTIAL
AND REAL PROPOSALS.
WE WAIT FOR THEM.
>> Reporter: YET THE WORD
FORGIVENESS, FORGIVENESS OF MORE
GREEK DEBT, IS NOT IN CHANCELLOR
MERKEL'S VOCABULARY.
AND SHE WON'T SIGN A BAD DEAL
FOR GERMANY JUST BECAUSE GREXIT
IS THE ALTERNATIVE.
IS THE ALTERNATIVE. >> (
translated): IT'S NOT
>> (translated): IT'S
NOT ABOUT WEEKS HERE ANYMORE.
ABOUT WEEKS HERE ANYMORE.
IT'S ABOUT A FEW DAYS.
>> Reporter: AFTER MORE THAN
FIVE MONTHS OF OFTEN ACRIMONIOUS
NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE GREEKS,
CONFIDENCE IN ATHENS IS AT A
VERY LOW EBB HERE.
ALL DAY WE'VE HEARD SENIOR
EUROPEAN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
SAYING THAT THEY ARE WAITING FOR
SERIOUS AND CREDIBLE PROPOSALS
FOR GREEK REFORM.
INSTEAD IT SEEMS THAT THE GREEKS
TURNED UP WITH NO CONCRETE
PROPOSALS AALL.T
BUT THE NEW GREEK FINANCE
MINISTER EUCLID TSAKALOTOS WAS
GIVING NOTHING OF HIS GAMEPLAN
AWAY.
IN STARK CONTRAST TO HIS
OUTSPOKEN PREDECESSOR, WHO WAS
SACKED YESTERDAY, TO HELP PAVE
THE WAY FOR A DEAL.
HERE'S LOOKING AT EUCLID, AS ONE
IRISH NEWSPAPER PUT IT TODAY.
THE CLOSEST TO CONCRETE
PROPOSALS: SOME BULLET POINTS
APPARENTLY WRITTEN ON HOTEL NOTE
P
THOUGH A WRITTEN DOCUMENT IS
EXPECTED TO BE DELIVERED HERE
TOMORROW.
LATVIA'S FINANCE MINISTER
TELLING ME HE COULD SCARCELY
BELIEVE HOW LITTLE THE GREEKS
HAD TOLD HIM.
HAD TOLD HIM. >> (
translated): WE WERE
VERY
>> (translated): WE
WERE VERY SURPRISED AND SHOCKED
BY WHAT WE
SURPRISED AND SHOCKED BY WHAT WE
SAW.
WE WERE EXPECTING MORE.
WE HAVE BEEN WAITING FOR OVER
FIVE MONTHS.
WE HAVE BEEN WAITING OVER THE
PAST TWO DAYS TO GET A RESPONSE
TO SEE WHAT THE GREEKS READY TO
DO IN ORDER TO SAVE THEIR OWN
COUNTRY AND TO HELP THEMSELVES,
BUT WE HAVEN'T RECEIVED THAT.
>> Reporter: AND TALK OF GREECE
LEAVING THE EURO NOW OUT IN THE
OPEN.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO BE HONEST
WITH YOU SO I CANNOT EXCLUDE.
>> Reporter: SO TONIGHT, MR.
TSIPRAS HAS BEEN TALKING TO A
GERMAN CHANCELLOR WHO HAS SAID
THERE IS NO BASIS FOR
NEGOTIATIONS.
AND SO GREEK EXIT IS MORE A
PROBABILITY THAN IT WAS ONLY
YESTERDAY.
>> Ifill: THE GREEK LEADER ALSO
SPOKE BY PHONE WITH PRESIDENT
OBAMA.
THE WHITE HOUSE URGED EUROPE TO
TRY TO REACH A RESOLUTION THAT
PROMOTES GROWTH AND STABILITY IN
GREECE.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, THERE'S A NEWS REPORT
THE U.S. ARMY PLANS TO CUT
40,000 TROOPS FROM ITS RANKS IN
THE NEXT TWO YEARS.
AND, 17,000 CIVILIAN WORKERS
WILL ALSO BE LAID OFF.
ACCORDING TO "USA TODAY," THE
PLAN IS TO BE ANNOUNCED THIS
WEEK.
IT WOULD LEAVE AN ARMY OF ABOUT
450,000 SOLDIERS.
SOME OF THE DOWNSIZING HAS BEEN
EXPECTED, AS U.S. INVOLVEMENT IN
IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN WOUND DOWN.
>> Ifill: THE MAN ACCUSED IN THE
MASS SHOOTINGS IN CHARLESTON,
SOUTH CAROLINA WAS INDICTED
TODAY ON ADDITIONAL CHARGES.
PROSECUTORS ADDED THREE COUNTS
OF ATTEMPTED MURDER AGAINST
DYLANN ROOF.
HE'D ALREADY BEEN CHARGED WITH
MURDERING NINE PEOPLE AT A
HISTORIC BLACK CHURCH.
>> Woodruff: IN THE PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN, DEMOCRAT HILLARY
CLINTON WENT AFTER DONALD TRUMP
AND HIS FELLOW REPUBLICANS ON
IMMIGRATION.
SHE TOLD CNN THAT THE G.O.P.
SHOULD HAVE CONDEMNED TRUMP FOR
REMARKS ON MEXICAN MIGRANTS THAT
DREW WIDESPREAD CRITICISM.
>> I FEEL VERY BAD AND
DISAPPOINTED WITH HIM AND WITH
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY FOR NOT
RESPONDING IMMEDIATELY AND
SAYING ENOUGH, STOP IT.
BUT THEY ARE ALL IN THE SAME
GENERAL AREA ON IMMIGRATION.
>> Woodruff: CLINTON SAID SHE
FAVORS A PATH TO CITIZENSHIP FOR
MIGRANTS, WHILE THE REPUBLICAN
HOPEFULS DO NOT.
>> Ifill: HEROIN ABUSE IN THE
U.S. HAS RISEN DRAMATICALLY OVER
THE LAST DECADE.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION REPORTED TODAY
THE NUMBER OF USERS GREW BY
NEARLY 300,000 PEOPLE OVER THE
10-YEAR PERIOD BETWEEN 2002 AND
2013.
USE OF THE DRUG DOUBLED AMONG
WHITE AMERICANS, EVEN AS IT
LEVELED OFF IN OTHER RACIAL
GROUPS.
THE INCREASE WAS DRIVEN IN PART
BY THE FALLING PRICE OF HEROIN.
>> Woodruff: THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION IS URGING MORE
COUNTRIES TO HIKE TAXES ON
CIGARETTES.
THE U.EA
TODAY THE TAX NEEDS TO BE MORE
THAN 75% OF THE RETAIL PRICE
BEFORE PEOPLE ARE DETERRED FROM
SMOKING.
AGENCY FIGURES SHOW AROUND
SIX MILLION PEOPLE DIE EACH YEAR
FROM TOBACCO-RELATED ILLNESSES.
>> Ifill: AND ON WALL STREET
TODAY, THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL
AVERAGE GAINED MORE THAN 90
POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE
17,775.
THE NASDAQ ROSE FIVE POINTS,
AND THE S&P ADDED 12.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
TALKS FOR A NUCLEAR DEAL WITH
IRAN ARE EXTENDED ONCE AGAIN.
A SURGE OF SUICIDES IN
FINANCIALLY TROUBLED GREECE.
VIOLENCE HEATS UP IN CITIES
ACROSS THE U.S.
AND, A DEPOSITION SHOWS BILL
COSBY ADMITTED HE OBTAINED DRUGS
IN ORDER TO HAVE SEX WITH WOMEN.
>> Woodruff: THE LATEST DEADLINE
TO REACH A NUCLEAR WEAPONS
AGREEMENT WITH IRAN CAME AND
WENT TODAY, WITH NO DEAL TO SHOW
FOR IT.
IRAN, THE UNITED STATES, AND
FIVE OTHER MAJOR WORLD POWERS
WILL KEEP NEGOTIATING FOR A
LONG-TERM AGREEMENT THAT TACKLES
SOME OF ITS MOST CONTENTIOUS
ISSUES.
NO NEW FORMAL DEADLINE HAS BEEN
SET, AND AT THE WHITE HOUSE
TODAY, PRESS SECRETARY JOSH
EARNEST SAID THERE WON'T BE A
DEAL UNTIL THE STICKING POINTS
ARE RESOLVED.
>> THE PRESIDENT WILL NOT ACCEPT
ANY SORT OF AN AGREEMENT THAT
FALLS SHORT OF THE POLITICAL
COMMITMENTS THAT WERE MADE BACK
IN APRIL AND AS SECRETARY KERRY
HIMSELF SAID BACK ON SUNDAY, WE
HAVE NEVER BEEN CLOSER TO
REACHING A FINAL AGREEMENT THAN
WE ARE NOW.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON THE
IRAN NUCLEAR TALKS, WE TURN TO
INDIRA LAKSHMANAN OF BLOOMBERG
NEWS.
SHE IS IN VIENNA AND I SPOKE TO
HER A SHORT WHILE AGO.
INDIRA, WELCOME.
SO WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF
MISSING THIS?
THE AMERICANS WANTED THIS
DEADLINE.
THE IRANIANS REALLY DIDN'T.
>> WELL, I MEAN, THIS IS THE
FIFTH DEADLINE DIPLOMATS HAVE
MISSED IN THE IRAN TALKS IN THE
LAST TWO YEARS.
I SAY DEADLINE BUT REALLY
THEY'RE SELF-IMPOSED TARGET
DATES THAT THE SIX POWERS IN
IRAN HAVE SET FOR EACH OTHER,
TRYING TO REACH SOME ASPECT OF
THE AGREEMENT AT EACH POINT.
NOW, WE'VE MISSED THIS DEADLINE.
WHAT THEY HAVE DONE IN THE
MEANTIME IS EXTENDED UNTIL
FRIDAY THE INTERIM AGREEMENT
THAT GIVES TEMPORARY LIMITED
ADVANTAGES RELIEF TO IRAN IN
EXCHANGE FOR FREEZING THEIR
NUCLEAR PROGRAM WHERE IT IS NOW
AND STOPPING THE MOST SENSITIVE
NUCLEAR WORK THEY DO.
BUT DIPLOMATS MADE CLEAR ON BOTH
SIDES THAT EVEN THOUGH THEY'RE
TRYING TO GET THIS DEAL BY
FRIDAY, NOW, THERE IS NO
GUARANTEE THAT WILL HAPPEN, THAT
TALKS COULD CONTINUE AFTER
FRIDAY OR COULD SIMPLY FAIL, WE
HAVE BEEN TOLD.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ARE THE MAIN
UNRESOLVED ISSUES?
WHAT'S KNOWN ABOUT THAT?
>> WELL, WE HEARD FROM THE
RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER SERGEY
LAVROV THAT THE ARMS EMBARGO
IMPOSED ON THE UNITED NATIONS
REMAINS A BIG STICKING POINT.
IRAN WANTS IT LISTED AND THE
U.N. AND NEGOTIATING PARTNERS
INSISTED IT CANNOT BE LIFTED AND
THEY'VE ALSO SAID THEY WANT THE
MISSILE PROGRAM T NOT TO BE.
IF THEY CAN'T GET A DEAL BY
FRIDAY, IT DOUBLES THE TIME THE
U.S. CONGRESS HAS TO REVIEW THE
DEAL.
IF THEY GET IT BY FRIDAY,
CONGRESS ONLY HAS 30 DAYS TO
GIVE A THUMBS UP ORN.THEY DON'T,
CONGRESS HAS TWO MONTHS TO GO
OVER AND PICK OVER EVERY SINGLE
DETAIL OF THE DEAL.
>> Woodruff: INDIRA, WHAT ARE
YOU HEARING ABOUT THE
ATMOSPHERICS, ABOUT HOW IT'S
GOING BEHIND CLOSED DOORS?
>> WELL, IT'S INCREDIBLY TENSE
AND EXHAUSTING, AS YOU CAN
IMAGINE.
THIS IS 22 MONTHS OF
NEGOTIATIONS.
A SENIOR AMERICAN OFFICIAL TOLD
US TONIGHT THEY CALCULATED THEY
HAD TAKEN 69 TRIPS ACROSS THE
ATLANTIC.
THIS IS THE SECOND FOURTH OF
JULY THE TEAM SPENT IN VIENNA.
IT'S 100 DEGREES.
THE AIR CONDITIONING IS NOT UP
TO SNUFF FOR THAT WEATHER.
THERE WAS QUITE A HEATED
EXCHANGE LAST NIGHT BETWEEN
IRANIAN FOREIGN MINISTER ZARIF
AND THE OTHER FOREIGN MINISTERS.
NO SLAMMING OF DOORS BUT TEMPERS
FLARED AS THEY PRESSED HIM TO
MAKE CONCESSIONS HE DIDN'T WANT
TO MAKE.
SO I THINK EVERYBODY IS GETTING
TO THE END OF THEIR ROPE.
THE AMERICANS HAVE TOLD US, NO
MATTER HOW TIRED THEY, ARE
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO SETTLE FOR
A DEAL THAT, AS THE PRESIDENT
SAID, IS LESS THAN WHAT THEY
AGREED TO IN APRIL IN LAUSANNE,
AND IF THEY CAN'T GET THAT GOOD
DEAL, THERE WILL BE NO DEAL.
AN AMERICAN OFFICIAL SAID THEY
FELT IT WOULD BE A TRAGEDY IF
THEY HAD GOTTEN THIS FAR BUT
COULDN'T GET A DEAL BUT AT THE
SAME TIME ARE NOT WILLING TO
ACCEPT A SUBSTANDARD DEAL THAT
WOULDN'T EVEN MAKE IT THROUGH
CONGRESS' MUSTER.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ARE THE
EXPECTATIONS, THAT THEY WILL
COME TOGETHER IN THE END AND IS
THE U.S. AND ITS ALLIES, THE
COUNTRIES IT'S NEGOTIATING WITH
ACROSS THE TABLE FROM IRAN, ARE
THEY STICKING TOGETHER?
>> SO FAR, FROM WHAT WE
UNDERSTAND, THEY ARE STICKING
TOGETHER, WHICH IS INTERESTING
BECAUSE THERE IS CERTAINLY A
LOFTO TENSIONS BETWEEN THE
UNITED STATES AND RUSSIA, TO SAY
THE LEAST, OVER UKRAINE, SYRIA,
AND OTHER ISSUES.
BUT WHAT WE'RE TOLD BY THE
AMERICANS THAT DESPITE THEIR
DIFFERENCES THEY WILL STICK
TOGETHER ALONG WITH THE
EUROPEANS AND CHINESE AND HAVE A
SOLID POSITION THEY'RE COMING TO
IRAN WITH.
ONE LITTLE DEVELOPMENT WE HEARD
TODAY IS THE ACCENT ISSUE FOR
U.N. ATOMIC INSPECTORS, LOOKS
LIKE THAT MAY BE SOMETHING THEY
MAY BE IN THE PROCESS OF
RESOLVING OR MAY BE RESOLVED.
THE AMERICSA
AGREED UNTIL EVERYTHING IS
AGREED.
IT'SREICH A RUBRICS CUBE AND
EVERY PIECE HAS TO FALL IN
PLACE.
I THINK IT'S MORE LIKELY THAN
NOT THEY WILL GET A DEAL BY
FRIDAY BUT THEY PREPARED US FOR
THE POSSIBILITY THAT, IF IRAN
DOESN'T MAKE THE SO-CALLED TOUGH
POLITICAL DECISIONS IT NEEDS TO,
THAT THESE TALKS COULD, IN FACT,
COLLAPSE AND WE WOULD BE IN
COMPLETELY NEW TERRITORY, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: WELL, INDIRA, YOU
AND THE REST OF THE PRESS CORPS
AND THE REST OF THE WORLD
CONTINUES TO WAIT.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NOW, ANOTHER LOOK AT
HOW GREECE'S STRAINED ECONOMY IS
AFFECTING ITS PEOPLE.
FOR THE FIRST FOUR MONTHS OF
2014, THE BUDGET FOR GREECE'S
132 HOSPITALS WAS $735 MILLION.
THIS YEAR, THAT NUMBER DROPPED
TO $50 MILLION, A PRECIPITOUS
DECLINE THAT HAS PLACED
PREDICTABLE STRESS ON THE
NATION'S MEDICAL SYSTEM.
NOW, PSYCHIATRISTS AND OTHER
MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS WARN THAT
DEEPENING POVERTY WILL LEAD TO
AN INCREASE IN SUICIDES AND
PREVENTABLE DEATHS.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MALCOLM BRABANT REPORTS FROM
ATHENS.
>> Reporter: IT'S A LETTER THAT
NO ONE SHOULD HAVE TO READ.
THE SUICIDE NOTE LEFT BY 77-
YEAR-OLD PHARMACIST DIMITRIS
CHRISTOULAS IS NOW A TREASURED
POSSESSION OF HIS DAUGHTER EMMY.
>> (translated): IF ONE
GREEK
GREEK WAS TO TAKE UP A
KALASHNIKOV, I
WAS TO TAKE UP A KALASHNIKOV, I
WOULD BE THE SECOND.
BUT SINCE I AM TOO OLD TO REACT
ACTIVELY AND PHYSICALLY, I FIND
NO OTHER SOLUTION THAN THAT OF A
DIGNIFIED EXIT BEFORE I BEGIN
SEARCHING THROUGH THE GARBAGE
FOR MY FOOD.
I BELIEVE THAT ONE DAY, BECAUSE
THE YOUNGER GENERATION HAVE NO
FUTURE, THEY WILL TAKE UP ARMS
AND HANG THE TRAITORS OF THE
NATION UPSIDE DOWN IN SYNTAGMA
SQUARE JUST AS THE ITALIANS DID
IN 1945 WITH MUSSOLINI.
>> Reporter: CHRISTOULAS SHOT
HIMSELF BENEATH THIS PINE TREE
IN ATHENS SYNTAGMA SQUARE, WHERE
OPPONENTS URGED GREEK VOTERS TO
REJECT THE INTERNATIONAL
AUSTERITY PROGRAMME IN LAST
WEEKEND'S REFERENDUM, AND RIGHT
IN FRONT OF PARLIAMENT AT WHICH
THE SUICIDE NOTE WAS AIMED.
ONE OF THE FIRST ON THE SCENE
WAS DOORMAN PANOS KYRIAKOPOULOS.
>> (translated):
EVERYONE WHO
EVERYONE WHO WORKS AROUND HERE
WAS DREADFULLY
WORKS AROUND HERE WAS DREADFULLY
UPSET AS WELL AS THOSE WHO WERE
PASSING BY.
IT WAS SO UNEXPECTED-- A MAN
BLOWING HIS BRAINS OUT IN
SYNTAGMA SQUARE-- IT WAS
TERRIBLE, JUST TERRIBLE'
>> Reporter: IT'S BEEN THREE
YEARS SINCE THE SUICIDE, AND
EMMY CHRISTOULA HAS COME TO
TERMS WITH HER FATHER'S MOTIVE.
DIMITRIS WAS NOT DEPRESSED.
HE WAS A LEFT WINGER.
AND HIS DEATH WAS A POLITICAL
ACT.
>> (translated): LOOK.
AT A PERSONAL LEVEL, THE LOSS IS
ALWAYS TREMENDOUS BECAUSE HERE
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT A
RELATIONSHIP WHICH WAS
EXCEPTIONALLY GOOD, A VERY
STRONG RELATIONSHIP THROUGHOUT
ALL THE YEARS OF MY LIFE BASED
ON A REALLY STRONG AND RICH
EMOTIONAL FOUNDATION.
BUT YES.
THE FACT THAT MY FATHER DECIDED
TO BREAK THE SILENCE OF OUR OWN
SOCIAL SUICIDE, OF OUR OWN
SOCIETY, DOESN'T EASE THE PAIN
BUT IT MAKES ME PROUD.
>> Reporter: THIS IS GREECE'S
SUICIDE TLIHONE.
CALLERS WHO ARE SO DEPRESSED
THEY ARE CONSIDERING KILLING
THEMSELVES CAN BE CONNECTED TO
AN ON DUTY PSYCHIATRIST
ELSEWHERE IN THE COUNTRY, WHO
WILL ATTEMPT TO CONVINCE THEM
LIFE IS WORTH LIVING.
SINCE THE CRISIS, SUICIDES HAVE
INCREASED BY ROUGHLY 50%.
RECENTLY THOUGH NUMBERS WENT
DOWN.
BUT ARIS VIOLATZIS, CHIEF
PSYCHOLOGIST OF THE KLIMAKA
SUICIDE PREVENTION ORGANISATION,
WARNS THE UPWARD TREND COULD
RETURN.
>> IF THINGS WILL GET WORSE, IF
GREECE AND ITS PARTNERS WON'T
FIND A SOLUTION, THE OTHER
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES, OUR PARTNERS
WON'T HELP THE SITUATION TO GET
BETTER AND WE HAVE MORE
UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE FUTURE, THAT
IS PROBABLY GOING TO BRING MORE
SUICIDES THAN WE ALREADY HAVE.
NOW THIS IS SOMETHING THAT MUST
BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT.
BY THE OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
>> Reporter: THE STRAIN OF
AUSTERITY IS EVERYWHERE.
THIS TAXI DRIVER DEVELOPED A
STRESS RELATED SKIN RASH
COMPLAINT AFTER HE PAID NEARLY
$200,000 DOLLARS FOR HIS CAB AND
OPERATING LICENSE, AND ITS VALUE
WENT DOWN BY TWO THIRDS.
>> Reporter: THE COLLAPSING
MEDICAL SYSTEM, LIKE THE
INCREASE IN SUICIDES, ARE BOTH
SYMPTOMS OF AUSTERITY IN GREECE.
>> (translated): I HAVE
NO
>> (translated): I
HAVE NO INSURANCE.
INSURANCE.
I HAVE NO PENSION.
I HAVE NOTHING.
>> Reporter: PENSIONER DIONYSSIA
MICHAELIDOU HAS COME WITH HER
UNEMPLOYED DAUGHTER DEPSINA TO
ATHENS' ELPIS HOSPITAL WHERE
THEY KNOW THEY CAN OBTAIN VITAL
MEDICATION FOR FREE.
ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTOR, THE
HOSPITAL IS CURRENTLY ACTING
ILLEGALLY, BECAUSE IT IS SERVING
PEOPLE WHO DON'T HAVE STATE
MEDICAL COVERAGE.
AT THE START OF THE CRISIS THE
HOSPITAL'S ANNUAL BUDGET WASILLN
TO ABOUT EIGHT.
THE DIRECTOR THEO GIANNAROS IS
ON A MISSION TO SAVE LIVES.
>> WITH THIS PROBLEM, THE NEXT
MONTHS, EVEN THE INSURED PEOPLE
AREN'T GOING TO GET THE PROPER
TREATMENT.
THE NEW THERAPIES ARE VERY
EXPENSIVE.
SO LIKE OTHER COUNTRIES IN THE
BALKANS, IF THEY HAVE A VERY
STRANGE DISEASE, THEY ARE
GETTING ASPIRINS.
BUT ASPIRINS CAN'T SAVE THEIR
LIVES.
SO IF WE DON'T HAVE ANY MONEY,
OUR TREATMENTS ARE GOING TO BE
ASPINS,IR OR RED PEPPERS LIKE IN
AFRICA ETCETERA.
>> Reporter: ISIDOROS TSAGAS IS
EM
THORACIC CANCER ONLY BECAUSE HE
WAS ABLE TO RECEIVE FREE
MEDICATION AND TREATMENT FROM
THE ELPIS HOSPITAL.
>> THIS HOSPITAL SAVED MY LIFE.
OTHERWISE I WAS DEAD.
EXCEPT FOR A MIRACLE, EXCEPT FOR
GOD.
WE ARE A COUNTRY, A MEMBER OF
THE EUROPEAN UNION.
SO ALL OF THE POLITICAL
GOVERNMENTS HAVE TO CARE ABOUT
THAT.
AND HAVE THE HEALTH IN FIRST
PRIORITIES.
>> Reporter: EUROPEAN CHARITIES
GAVE THE HOSPITAL A MOBILE
INTENSIVE CARE UNIT TO TREAT
PATIENTS WHO COULDN'T LEAVE
THEIR HOMES, BUT GREEK
BUREAUCRACY PREVENTED THE
AMBULANCE FROM BEING REGISTERED,
AND IT HAS NOT BEEN USED FOR
EIGHTEEN MONTHS.
AS GREECE TEETERS ON THE BRINK,
DRUG SUPPLIES ARE RUNNING LOW.
PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES ARE
OWED MORE THAN $1 BILLION AND
HAVEN'T BEEN PAID SINCE
DECEMBER.
IN THE PAST THE COMPANIES HAVE
TEMPORARILY REFUSED TO SUPPLY
DRUGS BECAUSE OF UNPAID DEBTS.
BUT FOR THE TIME BEING, THEY
HAVE PLEDGED TO MAINTAIN THE
FLOW OF MEDICINE.
>> WHAT IS HAPPENING HERE IS A
CRIME AGAINST HUMANITY.
AND FOR THESE THINGS, FOR
EXAMPLE SOME YUGOSLAVS, DURING
THE WARS OF YUGOSLAVIA, THEY'VE
BEEN BROUGHT TO THE
INTERNATIONAL COURT FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS, FOR CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY BECAUSE THEY KILLED
SOME HUNDREDS, HERE SOME
THOUSANDS ARE GOING TO DIE, OR
HAVE DIED ALREADY.
>> Reporter: THE IMPACT OF
AUSTERITY ON THE MEDICAL
IS JUST ONE OF MANY REASONS WHY
GREEKS VOTED TO REJECT THE
EUROPEAN UNION'S LATEST BAIL OUT
OFFER AND ITS STRICT CONDITIONS.
THE VICTORY OF THE NO CAMPAIGN
UPLIFTED EMMY CHRISTOULA.
UPLIFTED EMMY CHRISTOULA. >> (
translated): A PERSON
WHO
>> (translated): A
PERSON WHO HAS LIVED TO THE AGE
OF 77 WITH
HAS LIVED TO THE AGE OF 77 WITH
A COLLECTIVE VISION AND NOT THE
EGOCENTRIC, EGOTISTICAL AND
PERSONAL WAY OF LIFE AND HAS
FOUGHT MANY BATTLES IN
ESPECIALLY DIFFICULT TIMES--
BECAUSE GREECE HAS BEEN THROUGH
AN EXCEPTIONAL NUMBER OF TRIALS
AND TRIBULATIONS THROUGHOUT
HISTORY WHO DECIDES NOT TO
EXPRESS THIS VISION IN AN
EGOTISTICAL WAY BUT BY
SACRIFICING HIS OWN LIFE TO
RELAY THE MESSAGE OF THIS
COLLECTIVE VISION.
WE CAN ONLY CONSIDER HIS DEATH
AS A NON SELFISH ACT, AND
PROBABLY THE MOST HUMANE ACT OF
HIS LIFE.
>> Reporter: BUT AS EUROPE
DECIDES WHETHER TO CUT OFF
GREECE'S FINANCIAL LIFELINE, A
SYMBOLIC ACT BENEATH AN OLD PINE
TREE THREE YEARS AGO RESONATES
LOUDER THAN EVER.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, THIS IS
MALCOLM BRABANT IN ATHENS.
>> Woodruff: THE PRECISE NUMBERS
OF SUICIDES IN GREECE ARE VERY
HARD TO DETERMINE, ALTHOUGH AN
ESTIMATED 12,000 HAVE TAKEN
PLACE SINCE THE ONSET OF
ECONOMIC AUSTERITY.
KLIMAKA, THE SUICIDE PREVENTION
ORGANIZATION MALCOLM VISITED IN
HIS REPORT, ATTRIBUTES THE
UNDERREPORTING TO CULTURAL
STIGMA AND THE DIFFICULTY IN
GETTING A CHRISTIAN FUNERAL IN
SUCH AN OVERWHELMINGLY ORTHODOX
NATION.
>> Ifill: AGAINST THE BACKDROP
OF HIGH-PROFILE TRAGEDIES IN
CHARLESTON, BALTIMORE AND OTHER
CITIES, ADDITIONAL TROUBLING
STATISTICS HAVE COME TO LIGHT--
A SPIKE IN DAY-TO-DAY GUN
VIOLENCE IN A NUMBER OF CITIES
ACROSS THE NATION.
THAT'S LED TO DOUBLE-DIGIT JUMPS
IN ST. LOUIS... IN BALTIMORE...
AND IN CHICAGO, WHERE 10 PEOPLE
WERE KILLED OVER THE FOURTH OF
JULY WEEKEND.
THERE ARE AS MANY THEORIES OF
WHY, AS THERE ARE PEOPLE TASKED
TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEM.
WE TALK NOW TO THREE OF THEM:
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE IS THE
MAYOR OF BALTIMORE, WHICH HAS
STRUGGLED WITH A SURGE IN
VIOLENCE THIS SUMMER THAT
PREDATED THE HIGH-PROFILE DEATH
OF FREDDIE GRAY IN POLICY
CUSTODY.
MITCH LANDREIU IS THE MAYOR OF
NEW ORLEANS, WHERE SHOOTINGS ARE
DOWN THIS YEAR.
AND GARY SLUTKIN IS THE FOUNDER
AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF CURE
VIOLENCE, A NATIONAL INITIATIVE
TO STOP VIOLENCE IN TEN CITIES
INCLUDING CHICAGO, NEW ORLEANS,
AND BALTIMORE.
WELCOME TO YOU ALL.
GARY SLUTKIN, WE HEARD ABOUT THE
INCREDIBLE RASH OF KILLINGS THIS
WEEKEND IN CHICAGO, AND YOU'VE
STUDIED IT THERE AS WELL AS
OTHER PLACES.
WHAT'S GOING ON?
>> WELL, I THINK WHAT'S USUALLY
MISSING IN THE CONVERSATION
AROUND VIOLENCE IS IT'S EPIDEMIC
NATURE ITSELF.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT' ITS CONTAGIS
NATURE.
WE KNOW MORE ABOUT VIOLENCE NOW
THAN TEN OR 15 YEARS AGO, AND
YOU NEVER REALLY KNOW WHAT GETS
SOMETHING GOING.
IN THE U.S., NOW, SOME OF THE
CITIES ARE GOING UP AND SOME ARE
NOT, BUT WHEN IT GETS GOING, IT
PERPETUATES ITSELF TO A CERTAIN
EXTENT.
THAT'S WHAT'S HAPPENING.
WHAT IS MOST RELEVANT IS WHETHER
YOU CAN GET THE RIGHT THINGS
INTO PLACE TO COOL THIS
EPIDEMIC, THIS TYPE OF EPIDEMIC
DOWN.
AND THIS IS BEING DONE IN
BALTIMORE AND IN SOME OF THE
NEIGHBORHOODS IN NEW ORLEANS AND
SOME OF THE NEIGHBORHOODS IN
CHICAGO AND ALSO IN SEVERAL
OTHER CITIES.
>> Ifill: I WANTED TO ASK
MAYOR RAWLINGS-BLAKE ABOUT THAT,
BECAUSE OF THE POINT YOU MADE
ABOUT WHAT'S HAPPENING IN
BALTIMORE.
A LOT OF ATTENTION IN BALTIMORE
MOST HAVING TO DO WITH WHAT SOME
CALL A RIOT, SOME CALL IT AN
UPRISING IN YOUR CITY STREETS.
BUT THIS PROBLEM WAS THERE,
ALREADY.
WHAT'S GOING ON IN YOUR CITY?
>> THE PROBLEM OF VIOLENCE
PREDATES ME AND HAS BEEN PART OF
BALTIMORE'S HISTORY FOR DECADES,
AND DR. SLUTKIN IS RIGHT.
IT CALLS FOR A HANDS-ON
APPROACH.
IN OUR NATION WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO
GET THE HOMICIDES DOWN TO THE
LOWEST NUMBER SINCE THE '70s,
BUT BALTIMORE IS STILL A MUCH
TOO MUCH VIOLENT CITY.
WHEN WE DID THAT BY EMEMPLOYEING
THE SAFE STREETS, OPERATION
CEASE FIRE, COMMUNITY POLICING,
WE'VE SEEN SUCCESS AND AN UPTICK
IN HOMICIDES AND VIOLENCE SINCE
THE UNREST WE HAD IN THE CITY.
WE'VE ALSO SEEN AN UPTICK IN
ARRESTS, AND WE KNOW WE'RE NOT
GOING TO BE ABLE TO ARREST OUR
WAY OUT OF IT.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE THE FOCUS
LIKE SAFE STREETS, CEASE FIRE,
THE COMMUNITY POLICING, BUT ALSO
ADDRESSING SOME OF THESE
UNDERLYING ISSUES THAT IMPACT
NOT JUST BALTIMORE BUT CITIES
ACROSS OUR COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: MAYOR LAIN DRIEWRKS
YOU USED THE TERM CULTURE OF
VIOLENCE.
SOMEXPLAIN TO ME WHAT YOU MEAN Y
THAT?
>> I THINK WE HAVE A NATIONAL
EPIDEMIC IN AMERICA PEOPLE WALK
BY EVERY DAY.
WE'RE SEEING THE UPRISINGS IN
FERGUSON AND BALTIMORE AND THE
UNSETTLINGS OF THE NATURE OF
POLICING IN THE COMMUNITY WHICH
IS REAL AND HAS TO BE FIXED.
EVEN WHEN THAT'S GOING ON ACROSS
AMERICA, PRETTY MUCH EVERY DAY,
WE'LL LOSE 40 AMERICANS.
SINCE 1980, WE'VE LOST 680,000
AMERICANS ON THE STREETS TO SOME
KIND OF VIOLENCE.
THAT'S WHAT I CALL CULTURAL
VIOLENCE.
A BEHAVIORAL PATTERN THAT
DEVELOPS OVER TIME THAT LOOKS
LIKE WHEN THERE'S A MINOR
DISRESPECT OR BEEF, THE WAY THE
INDIVIDUALS AR ARE RESOLVING THE
PROBLEM IS THROUGH VIOLENCE,
USUALLY ATTEND OF A GUN.
IT'S EPIDEMIC AND YOU SEE IT
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
IT SPIKES FROM TIME TO TIME.
STATISTICALLY, WE DON'T KNOW WHY
MURDERS GO UP AND ABSOLUTERS GO
DOWN OR VICE VERSA AND DR. DPEAR
GAR GARYSLUTKIN CAN GIVE YOU MOE
INFORMATION ABOUT THIS.
YOU CAN'T JUST POLICE YOUR WAY
OUT OF IT BUT POLICE ARE ANT
IMPORTANT PART, THAT'S WHY
COMMUNITY POLICING AND THE
INTERRUPTION ARE IMPORTANT.
WHEN YOU THINK OF IT AS A PUBLIC
HEALTH AND CRIMINAL PERSPECTIVE,
YOU GET A SENSE OF THE ALL HANDS
ON DECK APPROACH WE HAVE TO TAKE
TO REDUCE THE VIOLENCE ON THE
STREET THAT IN MY OPINION IS A
CULTURAL BEHAVIORAL PATTERN.
>> Ifill: GARY SLUTKIN, I
REMEMBER THIS CONVERSATION LAST
YEAR WHEN THERE WAS ANOTHER WAVE
OF FOURTH OF JULY VIOLENCE IN
CHICAGO.
SO WHAT'S THE ANSWER TO THE
QUESTION ABOUT WHAT UNDERLIES
THIS AND WHAT COMMUNITIES SHOULD
BE DOING ABOUT IT.
>> WELL, WHAT THE COMMUNITIES
HAVE AT THEIR HANDS NOW THAT
THEY DIDN'T HAVE BEFORE IS MUCH
MORE OF, AS MAYOR LANDRIEU SAID,
THE HEALTH APPROACH, SO NOW WE
CAN PUT INTO PLACE INTERRUPTERS
AND OTHER TYPES OF HEALTH
WORKERS IN ORDER TO TREAT IT
LIKE WE TREAT EBOLA.
AND AS FAR AS CHICAGO GOES, FOR
EXAMPLE, YOU JUST HAVE THIS
VERY, VERY AWFUL FOURTH OF JULY
WEEKEND IN CHICAGO, BUT THERE
WERE ZERO KILLINGS, IN FACT EVEN
ZERO SHOOTINGS IN THE INGLEWOOD
NEIGHBORHOOD, WHICH IS
NOTORIOUS, BECAUSE A LARGE
NUMBER OF HEALTH WORKERS WERE
TRAINED TO INTERRUPT AND TO
PREVENT SPREAD AND TO KEEP
EVENTS FROM HAPPENING.
SAME THING HAPPENED LAST YEAR ON
MEMORIAL DAY IN FOUR
NEIGHBORHOODS IN BALTIMORE WHEN
THE CITY ITSELF WAS HAVING A BIG
OUTBREAK, THE FOUR NEIGHBORHOODS
IN BALTIMORE THAT WERE USING
SAFE STREETS WHICH IS ALSO A
CURE VIOLENCE ADAPTATION, HAD
ZERO.
IN BALTIMORE, THERE WERE FOUR
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT -- TWO
NEIGHBORHOODS HAD OVER A YEAR
WITHOUT A KILLING USING THE
HEALTH APPROACH.
ADDING THIS HEALTH APPROACH IS
REALLY SHIFTING THE RESPONSE OF
THE EPIDEMIC IN A DIFFERENT WAY.
>> MAYOR RAWLINGS-BLAKE --
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT I WAS
ABOUT TO SAY.
WE HAVE ONE COMMUNITY THAT WAS
VERY VIOLENT WHEN I WAS COMING
UP IN BALTIMORE CALLED CHERRY
HILL IN SOUTH BALTIMORE.
THEY HAVE BEEN OVER 400 DAYS
WITHOUT A HOMICIDE, AND THAT
IS -- GROWING UP IN BALTIMORE,
YOU WOULD KNOW THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD, AND THAT STATISTIC
WOULD EVEN BE MORE REMARKABLE.
SO I AGREE, IT'S IMPORTANT THAT
WE EXPAND THAT PUBLIC HEALTH
APPROACH.
THE CHALLENGE IS TO MAKE SURE
THAT, NOT JUST IN BALTIMORE THAT
WE GET IT RIGHT, BUT EVERYWHERE,
WHERE YOU TAKE THAT PUBLIC
HEALTH APPROACH, YOU HAVE TO
HAVE THE PUBLIC HEALTH WORKERS
TRAINED AND THE RIGHT ONES THAT
CAN MAKE IT WORK AND THAT'S WHAT
WE ARE DOING IN BALTIMORE WITH
OUR EXPANSION OF SAFE STREETS TO
MAKE SURE THAT WE HAVE THE RIGHT
COMMUNITY ASSOCIATIONS, THE
RIGHT INTERRUPTERS THAT ARE OUT
THERE IN OUR STREET TEAMS THAT
CAN BE HELPFUL.
WE HAVE SEEN PROGRESS, BUT JUST
AS MAYOR LANDRIEU WAS SAYING, WE
CONTINUE TO SEE SPIKES IN SOME
AREAS, AND MY HOPE IS THAT I
WILL HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY AS
PRESIDENT OF THE CONFERENCE OF
MAYORS, WITH MY SECOND
VICE PRESIDENT MAYOR LANDRIEU,
TO BRING NATIONAL ATTENTION TO
ISSUES FACING OUR CITIES SO WE
CAN LOOK AT NOT JUST THE MODELS
TO HELP REDUCE VIOLENCE BUT TO
DEVELOP A NATIONAL AGENDA FOR
CITIES TO TAKE A LOOK AT THE
RESOURCES THAT HAVE BEEN CUT OFF
FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
CONGRESS HAS SCALED BACK SUPPORT
FOR CITIES FOR DECADES, AND I
DON'T THINK IT'S A SURPRISE THAT
THE VIOLENCE AND PARTICULARLY
THE GUN VIOLENCE HAS HAD AN
INVERSE -- YOU KNOW, THAT WHILE
THE INVESTMENTS HAVE GONE DOWN,
THE VIOLENCE HAS GONE UP, AND MY
HOPE IS THAT, OVER THIS YEAR,
WE'LL DEVELOP AN AGENDA THAT
WILL HELP REVERSE THAT TREND.
>> Ifill: MAYOR LANDRIEU, I'M
NOT SURE THERE IS AN ANSWER TO
THIS, BUT I THINK THE PRESIDENT
BROUGHT THIS UP A COUPLE OF
WEEKS AGO IN CHARLESTON AND
THAT'S THE ROOT CAUSES OF GUN
VIOLENCE.
THE VIOLENCE ARE SHOOTINGS, NOT
STABBINGS OR ANYTHING ELSE.
DO YOU THINK THERE IS A SPECIFIC
APPROACH THAT NEEDS TO BE TAKEN
THERE?
OR DOES THAT GET US INTO A
POLITICAL --
>> NO, IT'S NOT NECESSARILY THAT
IT'S A POLITICAL FIGHT OR NOT A
POLITICAL FIGHT.
GUNS ARE CERTAINLY A PART OF IT,
BUT THEY'RE NOT THE ONLY ANSWER
TO IT.
THE ISSUE GETS TO BE HOW AND WHY
OUR YOUNG PEOPLE ARE RESOLVING
THEIR DIFFERENCES THROUGH
VIOLENCE AND HOW THAT HAPPENED
OVER TIME.
ONE TO HAVE THE THINGS MAYOR
RAWLINGS MENTIONED WAS THE
AMOUNT OF FUNDING THAT USED TO
COME FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
TO MAKE SURE OUR NATIONAL
SECURITY WAS PROTECTED.
NATIONAL SECURITY HAPPENS
OVERSEAS BUT HAPPENS ON OUR
HOMELAND AND IT'S BEEN CUT, FOR
EXAMPLE FOR THE COPS PROGRAM, BY
80% SINCE 1966.
WHEN POLICE DEPARTMENTS ARE
STRETCHED, THEY DON'T DO NEARLY
AS MUCH COMMUNITY POLICING.
ON THE ISSUE OF GUNS, THAT'S
IMPORTANT, BUT WHEN YOU TALK TO
THE PEOPLE INVOLVED IN THIS
BUSINESS, THESE YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
TELLING YOU BE KILLED OR KILL.
AND MAYOR RAWLINGS IS TRYING TO
CAW CALL ATTENTION TO THE FACT
WE ARE LOSING 40 LIVES ON THE
STREETS OF AMERICA TODAY.
THE SHOOTER TODAY IS THE KILLER
KILLED TOMORROW, WHICH IS WHY
THE VIOLENCE HAS TO COME INTO
PLACE.
SO THIS HAS TO BE A HOLISTIC
APPROACH, A SAFETY APPROACH, A
PUBLIC HEALTH APPROACH, A
RESPONSIBILITY APPROACH IT TO
BURKS MAKE MO MISTAKE, THIS IS
CLEARLY A NATIONAL EPIDEMIC AND
NOT JUST ONE CITY, IT'S ALL OVER
AMERICA AND IN SPECIFIC
NEIGHBORHOODS WHICH, I THINK, IF
WE SPENT TIME ON, WE COULD
TARGET AND DO WELL WITH AND SAVE
AMERICAN LIVES.
>> Ifill: MAYOR MITCH
LANDRIEU, MAYOR STEPHANIE
RAWLINGS-BLAKE, AND GARY
SLUTKIN, FOUNDER AND EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF "CURE VIOLENCE,"
THANK YOU ALL SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, GWEN.
>> Woodruff: NOW, A CLOSER LOOK
AT THOSE NEW REVELATIONS IN THE
BILL COSBY STORY.
DOCUMENTS WERE RELEASED
YESTERDAY THAT FOUND THE
COMEDIAN ADMITTED BACK IN COURT
IN 2005 THAT HE GAVE WOMEN DRUGS
TO WOMEN HE WANTED TO HAVE SEX
WITH.
MORE THAN TWO DOZEN WOMEN HAVE
ACCUSED COSBY OF RAPE IN CASES
THAT GO BACK DECADES, AND OTHERS
HAVE SAID THEY WOKE UP AFTER
BLACKING OUT FOLLOWING USE OF
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL.
COSBY'S ALLEGED USE OF DRUGS HAS
BEEN CENTRAL IN SOME OF THOSE
ALLEGATIONS.
JEFFREY BROWN PICKS UP THE STORY
FROM THERE.
>> Brown: COSBY'S OWN WORDS CAME
FROM A DEPOSITION IN A CASE
BROUGHT IN 2005 BY AN EMPLOYEE
OF TEMPLE UNIVERSITY.
SHE'D ACCUSED COSBY OF DRUGGING
AND MOLESTING HER.
THAT CASE WAS SETTLED AND THE
TESTIMONY SEALED, UNTIL THE
JUDGE RELEASED IT YESTERDAY TO
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS.
THERE WERE IMMEDIATE PUBLIC
REPERCUSSIONS, AND POTENTIAL
FUTURE LEGAL CONSEQUENCES.
WE'RE JOINED BY AP REPORTER
MARY CLARE DALE, WHO BROKE THE
STORY.
AND NPR'S TELEVISION AND CULTURE
WRITER, ERIC DEGGANS.
MARY CLARE DALE, START FIRST AND
REMIND US, IF YOU WOULD, A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE CASE THAT
THIS CAME FROM AND THE
PARTICULARS OF THE DEPOSITION.
>> SURE.
THIS CASE DATES BACK TEN YEARS
WHEN A TEMPLE UNIVERSITY
EMPLOYEE ACCUSED COSBY OF
DRUGGING AND MOLESTING HER AT
HIS HOME WHERE SHE HAD GONE TO A
DINNER SEEKING CAREER ADVICE.
SHE WORKED FOR THE BASKETBALL
TEAM AND SAYS THAT, AFTER
DINNER, SHE TOOK THREE PILLS
FROM COSBY, WHICH HE SAID WAS
HERSCHEL -- HERBAL MEDICATION
FOR STRESS.
IN HIS DEPOSITION, UNSEALED
YESTERDAY, HE SAID THE DRUG WAS
BENADRYL.
HER LAWYERS DON'T BELIEVE THAT
AND ASKED COSBY ABOUT OTHER
DRUGS AND PRESCRIPTIONS HE MAY
HAVE TAKEN OVER THE YEARS AND HE
ADMITTED IN THE DEPOSITION THAT
HE USED QUAALUDES AND OBTAINED
THEM IN THE '70s FOR THE
PURPOSE TO USE THEM TO HAVE SEX
WITH WOMEN.
>> Brown: BUT THEN HE STOPPED
SHORT OF SAYING THAT HE DID IT
WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT, RIGHT?
I MEAN, THERE'S A POINT IN THE
DEPOSITION WHERE HE GETS ASKED
THAT AND HIS LAWYER STEPS IN.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, AND THAT'S THE
KEY POINT HERE.
WE REALLY DO ONLY HAVE SMALL
PORTIONS OF THE DEPOSITION.
WHAT HAPPENED WAS COSBY'S
LAWYERS WERE OBJECTING AND
INTERFERING, ACCORDING TO THE
WOMAN'S LAWYER, AS SHE
QUESTIONED COSBY, SO SHE STOPPED
THE PROCEEDING AND WENT TO COURT
AND ASKED THE JUDGE TO COMPEL
HIM AND HIS LEGAL TEAM TO
COOPERATE, AND THAT'S CALLED A
MOTION TO COMPEL.
THAT ALONG WITH THE SANCTIONS
MOTIONS SHE FILED IS WHAT THE
JUDGE UNSEALED YESTERDAY.
SO, AGAIN, WE SEE SOME EXCERPTS
BUT OFTENTIMES WE SEE THE
QUESTION ASKED, SUCH AS DID THE
WOMEN KNOWINGLY TAKE THESE
DRUGS, COSBY DIDN'T ANSWER.
WI BELIEVE HE DIDN'T ANSWER THAT
QUESTION ENTIRELY AND HE DID NOT
SAY HOW MANY WOMEN HE WOULD HAVE
GIVEN THE QUAALUDES TO.
>> Brown: AND ONE MORE
QUESTION TO YOU ON THE
PARTICULAR DEPOSITION, BECAUSE
IT'S VERY INTERESTING TO SEE THE
WAY THE JUDGE FRAMED THIS IN
UNSEALING IT.
HE POINTED VERY SPECIFICALLY TO
BILL COSBY'S PUBLIC ROLE AND
SAID THE STARK CONTRAST BETWEEN
BILL COSBY THE PUBLIC MORALIST
AND BILL COSBY THE SUBJECT OF
SERIOUS ALLEGATIONS CONCERNING
IMPROPER AND PERHAPS CRIMINAL
CONDUCT IS A MATTER TO WHICH THE
A.P. AND BY EXTENSION THE PUBLIC
HAS A SIGNIFICANT INTEREST.
>> RIGHT.
COSBY'S LAWYERS ARGUED PRIVACY
WAS AN ISSUE HERE AND EVEN
THOUGH HE WAS AN ENTERTAINER HE
THE JUDGE BELIEVEDE DEGREE OF
HE HAD GONE BEYOND THAT,
ACCEPTING THE A.P.'S ARGUMENT
THAT HE WAS NOT JUST A NORMAL
ENTERTAINER BUT HAD SPOKEN ON
FAMILY LIFE, EDUCATION, MORALITY
IN OUR PUBLIC LIFE AND THE JUDGE
SAID HE THEREFORE HAD SOMEWHAT A
LESSER DEGREE OF PRIVACY AND
THAT THE PUBLIC HAD AN INTEREST
IN SEEING WHAT HIS SWORN
DEPOSITION TESTIMONY WAS AND HOW
THAT COMPARED TO HIS MORALIZING.
>> Brown: ERIC DEGGANS, LET ME
BRING YOU IN HERE.
THESE CHARGES HAVE BEEN AROUND
FOR SOME TIME, BUT THIS
DEPOSITION COMING PUBLIC SEEMS
TO HAVE HAD IMMEDIATE IMPACT
INCLUDING ON SUPPORTERS OF
COSBY.
>> I THINK SO.
BEFORE THIS, WE HAD MANY WOMEN
COMING FORWARD, AS MANY AS 40,
TO SAY THAT THEY FELT THAT THEY
HAD BEEN DRUGGED AND SEXUALLY
ASSAULTED BY COSBY IN VARIOUS
WAYS, BUT THESE ARE WORDS THAT
PRESUMABLY CAME FROM HIS OWN
MOUTH, AND WE SAW, FOR EXAMPLE,
JILL SCOTT, AN R&B SINGER WHO'S
WELL KNOWN, SHE HAD DEFENDED
COSBY IN OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER
WHEN THE PUBLIC FIRST REALLY
STARTED TO TAKE A LOOK AT THESE
ALLEGATIONS, AND NOW, SINCE THIS
DEPOSITION HAS BEEN RELEASED,
SHE HAS RECANTED THAT SUPPORT
AND SAID SHE JUST NEEDED TO SEE
SOME KIND OF PROOF, SHE CALLED
IT.
FOR HER, SEEING COSBY ADMIT THAT
HE HAD OBTAINED QUAALUDES FOR
THE PURPOSE OF HAVING SEX WITH
WOMEN WAS ENOUGH.
I THINK FOR SOME PEOPLE WHO WERE
ON THE FENCE ABOUT SOME
ALLEGATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN MADE
ABOUT HIM, THAT MAY HAVE PULLED
THEM OFF THE FENCE TO SAY MAYBE
HE DIDN'T SEXUALLY ASSAULT THE
WOMEN IN A WAY HE'S BEING
ACCUSED OF, BUT SOMETHING
HAPPENED HERE THAT'S COUNTER TO
TO WHOLESOME IMAGE BILL COSBY'S
ALWAYS HAD.
>> Brown: BECAUSE IN THE
LARGER ARC OF THIS THERE HAS
BEEN A SENSE AND SOME CRITICISM
THAT COSBY MAY HAVE GOTTEN TOO
MUCH OF A PASS FROM PEOPLE IN
THE ENTERTAINMENT WORLD AND THE
MEDIA.
>> CERTAINLY, AND AS WAS POINTED
OUT, THIS WAS A LAWSUIT FROM
2005.
THE ALLEGATIONS, I THINK,
SURFACED IN 2004.
BUT PEOPLE DIDN'T REALLY TAKE A
CLOSE LOOK AT THIS, I THINK, INT
OCTOBER.
WE SAW A STANDUP COMIC HANNIBAL
BURRIS INCLUDE IN HIS ACT, YOU
KNOW, CRITICIZING BK BILL COSBYR
MORALIZING WHEN HE HAS THE
ALLEGATIONS IN HIS PAST, AND
IT'S ALMOST THE VOICE OF YOUNG,
BLACK COMEDY SAYING HOW CAN THIS
GUY BE AN ELDER STATESMAN FOR
COMICS AND MORALITY WHEN HE HAS
THIS IN HIS PAST?
AND IT CAUSED A GROUNDSWELL
WHERE PEOPLE LOOKED AT THESE
ALLEGATIONS, MORE WOMEN CAME
FORWARD AND WE SAW NBC AND OTHER
ENTITIES STEP BACK AND END THEIR
ASSOCIATIONS WITH THEM AND I
THINK THAT'S GOING TO CONTINUE
IN THE WAKE OF THIS LATEST
CORRELATION.
>> AND MARY CLARE DALE, WHAT
ABOUT THE THE LEGAL CONSEQUENCES
HERE IN TERMS OF HOW THE
DEPOSITION BECOMING PUBLIC
PLIGHT PLAY OUT?
>> RIGHT.
SOME WOMEN -- THREE WOMEN WHO
ARE SUING HIM FOR DEFAMATION IN
BOSTON SAYING THAT WHEN HE
DENIED THEIR ACCUSATIONS, HE
BASICALLY RENDERED THEM LIARS,
THEY BELIEVE THIS WILL BOLSTER
THEIR CLAIMS THAT HE DID THE
SAME TO THEM.
I DON'T THINK ANY CRIMINAL
CHARGES WILL ENSUE, NECESSARILY.
MANY OF THE CLAIMS ARE TOO OLD
TO BE BROUGHT CRIMINALLY, BUT I
KNOW THERE ARE A FEW IN
CALIFORNIA, GLORIA ALLRED IS
BRINGING A CIVIL SEXUAL ASSAULT
CASE.
COSBY IS TRYING TO GET THAT
THROWN OUT.
>> Brown: MARY CLARE DALE,
ERI DCEGGANS, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FOR GENERATIONS,
SCIENTISTS HAVE HAD TO UNDERTAKE
LONG VOYAGES ACROSS THE SEA TO
TRY TO BETTER UNDERSTAND THE
MYSTERIES OF VOLCANIC ACTIVITY
AND THE OCEANS THEMSELVES.
BUT NOW SCIENTIFIC ADVANCES AND
TECHNOLOGY CHANGED THE GAME.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS OUR STORY.
THAT USED TO BE THE CASE FOR
UNDERSEA VOLCANO KNOWN AS
AXIOSEA MOUNT.
TWO MONTHS AGO WHEN IT STARTED
SPEWING LAVA, THESE SCIENTISTS
KNEW INSTANTLY.
>> THIS IS ALL FEEDING
INFORMATION BACK.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU HAD 25
SENSORS SITTING ON THE LIP OF A
VOANO LCAND IT'S ALL FEEDING
INFORMATION BACK HERE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT. IT'S REALLY
EXCITING.
>> Sreenivasan: UNIVERSITY OF
WASHINGTON OCEANOGRAPHER JOHN
DELANEY IS THE DIRECTOR OF A
GROUNDBREAKING RESEARCH PROJECT
CALLED THE CABLED ARRAY, ALSO
KNOWN AS THE CABLED OBSERVATORY,
THAT HAS, IN EFFECT, TURNED
AXIAL SEAMOUNT INTO THE WORLD'S
FIRST WIRED VOLCANO.
>> THERE'S THE FISH.
LOOK AT THAT!
>> WE'RE STANDING IN OUR CONTROL
ROOM THAT ALLOWS FOLKS THAT ARE
HERE ON CAMPUS AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF WASHINGTON TO ACTUALLY
INTERACT WITH THE INSTRUMENTS
THAT MIGHT BE AS MUCH AS 400
KILOMETERS, 300 MILES OFFSHORE.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THE DAY OF
THE ERUPTION, A NETWORK OF
SENSORS ON THE VOLCANO STARTED
MEASURING MORE THAN 8,000 SMALL
EARTHQUAKES, AND THE SEAFLOOR
DROPPED SEVEN FEET.
>> WE'VE BEEN WAITING OUR WHOLE
LIVES TO HAVE THAT KIND OF
INFORMATION COME IN.
>> Sreenivasan: DEBBIE KELLEY
WAS ONE OF THOSE CLOSELY
WATCHING THE ERUPTION DATA.
SHE'S A CHIEF SCIENTIST ON THE
TEAM WHO STUDIES UNDERWATER
VOLCANOES.
THIS VOLCANIC RIDGE, IS LIKE
THOUSANDS OF MILES OF RIDGES
THAT CIRCLE THE EARTH BENEATH
THE OCEANS.
IT'S ALSO A SPOT WHERE TWO
TECTONIC PLATES PULL APART,
MAKING IT AN IDEAL LOCATION TO
STUDY.
KELLEY SAYS THAT THE CABLED
OBSERVATORY, WHICH WILL
EVENTUALLY SEND BACK REAL-TIME
DATA AND IMAGES ANYONE CAN
ACCESS, WILL FINALLY GIVE
SCIENTISTS, AND THE GENERAL
PUBLIC, INSIGHT INTO A COMPLEX
WORLD THEY KNOW VERY LITTLE
ABOUT.
>> IT WILL LET US HAVE NEW EYES
INTO THE OCEAN.
IT'S REALLY EXPENSIVE TO GO TO
SEA.
INTERNATIONAL LABORATORY WHERE
ANYBODY COULD HAVE ACCESS TO
THESE DATA AND IT DOESN'T COST
THEM ANYTHING.
>> Sreenivasan: HERE'S HOW IT
WORKS: AN ARRAY OF SOPHISTICATED
SENSORS, MOORINGS AND
ARE CONNECTED BY CABLES TO LARGE
HUBS CALLED PRIMARY NODES.
THOSE IN TURN ARE CONNECTED TO A
FIBER OPTIC INTERNET AND POWER
CABLE STRETCHING FROM THE
VOLCANO 300 MILES BACK TO SHORE.
>> THE GAME CHANGER IS THATIC C.
FIBER OPTIC CABLES BECAME THE
CENTERPIECE FOR FINALLY WE COULD
DO SCIENCE THROUGHOUT ENTIRE
VOLUMES OF THE OCEAN WITHOUT
ACTUALLY BEING THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE $150 MILLION
SYSTEM TOOK SIX YEARS TO DESIGN,
BUILD, AND IMPLEMENT.
AND IT WILL COST AT LEAST
SEVERAL MILLION A YEAR, MAYBE
MORE, TO MAINTAIN OVER ITS 25
YEAR LIFESPAN.
THE CABLED OBSERVATORY IS PART
OF AN EVEN LARGER NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION FUNDED
PROJECT CALLED THE "OCEAN
OBSERVATORY INITIATIVE" THAT
AIMS TO STUDY THE OCEANS IN A
MORE COMPREHENSIVE WAY THAN EVER
BEFORE.
THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
IS AN UNDERWRITER OF THE
NEWSHOUR.
CANADA HAS DEVELOPED A SIMILAR
NETWORK.
THE OBSERVATORY EQUIPMENT OFF
THE WEST COAST HAS NOW BEEN
OPERATING, ABOUT A MILE DOWN,
FOR NEARLY A YEAR.
DEEP SEA CREATURES SEEM TO HAVE
ADJUSTED TO THEIR NEW NEIGHBORS,
BUT THERE HAVE BEEN SOME
CHALLENGING MOMENTS.
DURING AN INITIAL VOYAGE TO MAP
THE SYSTEM'S MAIN CABLE, THE
TEAM DISCOVERED A SECTION HAD
ACTUALLY BEEN LAID ON TOP OF A
BOILING HOT HYDROTHERMAL VENT
NOT AN IDEAL PLACE FOR A
DELICATE CABLE AND IT WAS LATER
MOVED.
DEBBIE KELLEY SPECIALIZES IN
THOSE VENTS AND THE EXOTIC,
LARGELY UNSTUDIED LIFE FORMS
THAT SURROUND THEM.
SHE SAYS THIS PROJECT WILL HELP
SCIENTISTS UNDERSTAND SOME BASIC
SCIENCE ABOUT AN ECOSYSTEM THAT
MAY IN FACT PROVIDE A WINDOW
INTO THE ORIGINS OF LIFE ON THIS
PLANET.
>> 70% OF THE VOLCANOS ON THE
PLANET OCCURS UNDERWATER.
THERE'S MANY QUESTIONS THAT
ARISE BECAUSE WE'RE NEVER THERE
AT THE RIGHT PLACE AT THE RIGHT
TIME.
WE THINK THAT THERE'S MASSIVE
PLUMES DURING AN ERUPTION WHERE
YOU HAVE BILLIONS OF MICROBES
STREAMING OUT OF THE SEAFLOOR
AND THIS IS PROBABLY THE, THE
MOST EXTREME ENVIRONMENT ON
EARTH.
NOW MOST PEOPLE THINK THAT'S
WHERE LIFE STARTED.
>> Sreenivasan: THESE HARDY
MICROBES MAY HOLD THE KEY TO NEW
CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS OR
PHARMACEUTICAL DRUGS.
>> WE KNOW SO LITTLE ABOUT THESE
MICROBES, AND IT'S CLEAR THAT
THEY HAVE PHENOMENALLY DIFFERENT
METABOLISMS THAN MOST PEOPLE
THINK ABOUT.
AND SO THERE'S INTEREST IN
PERHAPS AS WE GET OUR BODIES
BECOME MORE RESISTANT TO
TETRACYCLINE OR PENICILLIN, THAT
MAYBE WE COULD START GETTING
MEDICINES FROM THE SEA THROUGH
THESE MICROBES.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM VOLCANIC
ERUPTIONS TO INTENSE DEEP SEA
PRESSURES AND NEAR FREEZING
TEMPERATURES, THE OBSERVATORY
EQUIPMENT HAS HAD TO OPERATE IN
A VERY CHALLENGING ENVIRONMENT.
SO, HOW HAS IT FARED?
>> THE SYSTEM HAS WORKED
AMAZINGLY WELL, BUT AS YOU WOULD
EXPECT IN THIS ENVIRONMENT,
THERE HAS BEEN SOME ATTRITION.
>> Sreenivasan: DANA MANALANG IS
A SENIOR ENGINEER IN THE APPLIED
PHYSICS LABORATORY AT THE
UNIVERSITY WHERE MUCH OF THE
CABLED OBSERVATORY EQUIPMENT WAS
DESIGNED AND BUILT.
AND WHERE FRAGILE SENSORS ARE
THOROUGHLY TESTED BEFORE BEING
DEPLOYED.
WHILE SOME PARTS OF THE SYSTEM
ARE INTENDED TO BE TRADED OUT
EVERY YEAR, OTHER PARTS,
INCLUDING THE MAIN CABLE, ARE
EXPECTED TO LAST FOR 25 YEARS.
MANALANG GAVE US A TOUR OF SOME
OF THE KEY COMPONENTS THE TEAM
IS WORKING ON BEFORE A SUMMER
RESEARCH CRUISE TO MAKE REPAIRS
AND CHECK ON THE EQUIPMENT.
WHAT ARE THESE BIG METAL
CONTAINERS?
>> WELL, THESE ARE BIG TITANIUM
HOUSINGS.
TITANIUM WON'T CORRODE UNDER THE
HIGH SALINITY CONDITIONS IN THE
OCEAN.
>> Sreenivasan: SO EVERYTHING'S
GOT TO BE SEALED UP SUPER TIGHT?
>> SEAWATER AND ELECTRONICS
DON'T MIX.
>> Sreenivasan: AND SHE SHOWED
US A FIRST OF ITS KIND SENSOR
THAT'S ALREADY SENDING BACK DATA
FROM THE VOLCANO.
>> THIS IS A HOMEGROWN SYSTEM
FOR MEASURING THE DIFFUSION OF
HIGH TEMPERATURE FLUIDS OUT OF
VENTS ON THE VOLCANO.
THERE'S 24 DIFFERENT TEMPERATURE
SENSORS ON HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE FIRST
PRIORITIES FOR THE TEAM THIS
SUMMER IS TO REPLACE VIDEO
CAMERAS ON THE SEAFLOOR THAT
STOPPED WORKING RECENTLY.
AND THEY ARE AWAITING A NEW
SOFTWARE SYSTEM, ALSO FUNDED BY
THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION,
NEEDED TO CAPTURE AND ORGANIZE
ALL THE DATA COMING IN.
FOR NOW, THE INFORMATION IS
BEING ARCHIVED AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF WASHINGTON.
DESPITE THOSE FEW SETBACKS, JOHN
DELANEY, WHO FIRST CAME UP WITH
THE IDEA OF A CABLED OBSERVATORY
MORE THAN 20 YEARS AGO, SAYS THE
PROJECT IS GOING TO
FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGE OUR
UNDERSTANDING OF THE OCEANS.
>> WE ARE, AS A SOCIETY, WE ARE
DEPENDENT ON THE OCEAN.
AND IF YOU WANT TO UNDERSTAND
THE COMPLEXITY OF ALL THE
PROCESSES THAT OPERATE IN THE
OCEAN, YOU'VE GOT TO BE IN THE
OCEAN. YOU'VE GOT TO BE MAKING
THE MEASUREMENTS IN REAL TIME
AND LOOKING AT THINGS THAT ARE
SHORT TERM, LONG TERM.
YOU CAN'T DO THAT FROM LAND.
YOU CAN'T DO THAT WITH JUST THE
ODD SHIP BIDING TIME.
YOU'VE GOT TO BE THERE IN THE
OCEAN 24/7, 365 FOR GENERATIONS.
THAT'S THE KEY.
>> Sreenivasan: OVER THE COMING
YEARS, DELANEY AND HIS
COLLEAGUES HOPE TO EXPAND THE
CABLED OBSERVATORY, AND HOPE
THAT THIS CHARTS A COURSE FOR
OTHER COUNTRIES TO BUILD THEIR
OWN OBSERVATORIES AS WELL.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN IN SEATTLE,
WASHINGTON.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
PROFILE OF A MOST UNUSUAL
WRITER, A MAN JEFF MET ON HIS
RECENT TRIP TO HAVANA FOR THE
SERIES OF REPORTS ON THE "CUBAN
EVOLUTION."
HERE'S OUR LOOK.
>> Brown: MUSICIAN, ZEN BUDDHIST
MONK, ARTIST, AND POET, OMAR
PEREZ WAS BORN AND RAISED IN
>> IT'S VERY MUCH IN THE
CULTURE.
THERE'S NO DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A
SONG AND A POEM.
THE BRAIN GETS ACTIVE WHEN YOU
LISTEN TO REAL FRESH MELODY.
SO THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENS
WITH POETRY, TOO.
>> Brown: PEREZ IS THE
ILLEGITIMATE SON OF
REVOLUTIONARCHE Y GUEVARA AND
LILLA LOPEZ, A STUDENT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF HAVANA IN THE
1960'S.
>> YOU KNOW, WHEN I WAS 25 YEARS
OLD, I WAS ALREADY A HUMAN
BEING, AND THEN SOMEBODY TOLD
ME, "DID YOU KNOW YOUR FATHER IS
CHE GUEVARA?"
I SAID, "NO, I DON'T."
I SAID, WELL, WHAT AM I GOING TO
DO NOW?
I'M 25 YEARS OLD, I'M A WRITER,
I'M A POET, I'M A TRANSLATOR,
WHAT SHOULD I BECOME.
SHOULD I BECOME SOMETHING
DIFFENT?RE
I DIDN'T WANT TO BECOME ANYTHING
DIFFERENT.
THAT'S WHAT I WANTED TO BE, A
POET.
>> Brown: GENERATIONS OF CUBANS
HAVE BEEN TAUGHT TO IDEALIZE THE
MARXIST REVOLUTIONARY FROM
ARGENTINA WHO ALONGSIDE FIDEL
CASTRO LED CUBA TO AN HISTORIC
REVOLUTION IN 1959.
PEREZ LIVES IN AN ELEGANT NOW
CRUMBLING BUILDING ALONGSIDE THE
CITY'S FAMOUS SEAWALL.
FOR HIS PART, HE DOESN'T SEEM TO
HOLD ON TO A ROMANTIC VIEW OF
THIS OR THE CUBAN REVOLUTION.
YOU'VE GROWN UP IN THE PERIOD OF
THE REVOLUTION.
WHAT'S YOUR SENSE OF WHERE IT'S
AT NOW?
IS IT ALIVE?
THE REVOLUTION HAS BEEN DEEDS
FOR DDE DECADES?
YEAH, SURE.
EVERYBODY KNOWS THAT.
THE REVOLUTION FOR ITS OWN
NATURE MUST BE A VERY BRIEF
MOMENT OF HUMAN EXISTENCE.
I REMBER,EM WHEN WE WERE SCHOOL,
EVERY YEAR WE HAD TO SAY THIS IS
THE YEAR OF INDUSTRIALIZATION,
THIS IS THE YEAR FOR
AGRICULTURE, THIS IS THE YEAR OF
WHATEVER, AND THEN SLOWLY,
SLOWLY BECAME YEAR 30 OF THE
REVOLUTION, YEAR 30 -- IT WAS
LIKE A CLOCK MOVING.
MOVING NOWHERE.
>> Brown: PEREZ SAYS HE'S NOT
POLITICAL BUT HE IS AN OBSERVER
OF THE TIMES.
>> I TRY NOT TO WRITE ABOUT
SOCIAL ISSUES, BUT IT COMES BACK
ALL THE TIME.
I CAN'T STOP NOW WRITING ABOUT
SOCIAL ISSUES, BUT NEITHER WILL
A SOCIOLOGIST OR POLITICIAN,
MORE LIKE ABANTHROPOLOGYIST.
>> Brown: TELL ME WHAT YOU SEE
IN SOCIETY, THEN, AS AN
ANTHROPOLOGIST OF CUBAN LIFE
NOW.
>> CONFUSION.
NOT IN A BAD OR IN A GOOD SENSE,
JUST CONFUSION.
A LACK OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION IN
THE SENSE THAT THE COMMUNITY
FOCUSED VERY WELL ORGANIZED, IS
VERY FRAGMENTED, AND THE STATE
IS VERY FRAGMENTED.
THEY ARE BOTH MOVING WITHOUT
REALLY KNOWING WHERE THEY ARE
MOVING.
>> Brown OMA:R PEREZ LIVES
SIMPLY, CREATING ART FROM SPARE
PARTS, OFTEN FROM THE WALLS OF
HIS CRACKED HOME.
>> SOMETIMES THEY ARE COMING
OUT.
>> Brown: HE THINKS
NORMALIZATION OF RELATIONS WITH
THE U.S., THE MONEY IT COULD
BRING, THE CHANGES THAT WILL
COME COULD CAUSE KIND OF AN
IDENTITY CRISIS FOR CUBANS.
>> WHAT YOU HAVE NOW IS AN
ATTEMPT TO REPRESENT SOCIETY
THROUGH THE ECONOMIC, COMMERCIAL
VALUES.
>> Brown: BUT I WOULD THINK
MANY CUBAN PEOPLE WOULD WANT
THAT FOR A BETTER LIFE.
>> I DON'T KNOW WHAT CUBAN
PEOPLE WANT.
IF YOU'RE NOT THINKING CLEARLY,
WHATEVER COMES FROM YOUR MOUTH
ALSO ADDS TO THE CONFUSION.
I WANT A CAR, I WANT A FIVE-YEAR
AMERICAN VISA, I WANT TO OPEN A
SHOP, I WANT TO HAVE ANOTHER
CAR, I WANT BLAH, BLAH, BLAH,
BLAH, BLAH...
>> Brown: BUT PEOPLE DO WANT
THOSE THINGS.
>> YES!
OKAY!
CONGRATULATIONS!
IF IT BRINGS HAPPINESS INTO
THEIR LIVES, IT'S OKAY WITH ME,
YOU KNOW?
>> Brown: WHAT'S THE ROLE OF A
POET IN A SOCIETY LIKE CUBA
TODAY?
>> TO OBSERVE AND HAVE FUN.
>> Brown: TO OBSERVE AND HAVE
FUN?
>> YES, TO OBSERVE AND HAVE FUN
WITH WHAT YOU'RE OBSERVING, AND
THEN TO PROPOSE IDEAS.
YOU DON'T EVEN NEED TO WRITE.
YOU CAN PAINT.
THERE ARE SO MANY WAYS TO
EXPRESS WHAT YOU WANT TO SAY.
YOU KNOW.
THIS IS WHAT ART IS ABOUT.
>> Brown: FROM HAVANA, CUBA,
I'M JEFFREY BROWN FOR THE PBS
"NewsHour".
>> Woodruff: MANY FASCINATING
VOICES JEFF FOUND IN CUBA.
>> YES.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NESHOUWR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
JOIN US ONLINE, AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.